docs: add migration guide (#5439)
golangci/golangci-lint: docs/src/docs/product/migration-guide.mdx

issues:
  exclude-use-default: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  exclusions:
    presets:
      - comments
      - common-false-positives
      - legacy
      - std-error-handling
```

</details>

#### `issues.exclude`

This property has been replaced with `linters.exclusions.rules`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
issues:
  exclude:
    - abcdef
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  exclusions:
  rules:
    - path: '(.+)\.go$'
      text: abcdef
```

</details>

#### `issues.include`

This property has been replaced with `linters.exclusions.presets`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
issues:
  include:
    - EXC0014
    - EXC0015
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  exclusions:
    presets:
      - common-false-positives
      - legacy
      - std-error-handling
```

</details>

### `linters-settings`

`linters-settings` section has been split to `linters.settings` and `formatters.settings`.

Settings for `gci`, `gofmt`, `gofumpt`, `goimports` are moved to the `formatters.settings` section.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  govet:

>     disable-all: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    enable-all: true
```

  gofmt:
    simplify: false
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    govet:

>       disable-all: true

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      enable-all: true
```

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  errcheck:
    ignore: 'io:.*'

```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    errcheck:
      exclude-functions:
        - 'io.ReadFile'
        - 'io.Copy(*bytes.Buffer)'
        - 'io.Copy(os.Stdout)'
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.exhaustive.check-generated`

This option has been removed.

To analyze generated files use `linters.exclusions.generated`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  exhaustive:
    check-generated: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  exclusions:
    generated: disable
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.forbidigo.forbid[].p`

This field has been replaced with `linters-settings.forbidigo.forbid[].pattern`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  forbidigo:
    forbid:
      - p: '^fmt\.Print.*$'
        msg: Do not commit print statements.
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    forbidigo:
      forbid:
        - pattern: '^fmt\.Print.*$'
          msg: Do not commit print statements.
```

</details>

> #### `linters-settings.forbidigo.forbid[].rawPattern`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `linters-settings.forbidigo.forbid[]<pattern>`
```

This option has been removed.

To ignore test files, use `linters.exclusions.rules`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  goconst:
    ignore-tests: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  exclusions:
    rules:
      - path: '(.+)_test\.go'
        linters:
          - goconst
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.govet.check-shadowing`

This option has been deprecated since v1.57.0 and has been removed.

Use `linters.settings.govet.enable: shadow` instead.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  govet:
    check-shadowing: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    govet:
      enable:
        - shadow
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.misspell.ignore-words`

This option has been replaced with `linters.settings.misspell.ignore-rules`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  misspell:
    ignore-words:
      - foo
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    misspell:
      ignore-rules:
        - foo
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.predeclared.ignore`

> This string option has been replaced with the slice option `linters.settings.predeclared.ignore`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This string option has been replaced with the slice option with the same name.
```

Use `run.go` instead.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  staticcheck:
    go: '1.22'
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
run:
  go: '1.22'
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.unused.exported-is-used`

This option has been deprecated since v1.60.0 and has been removed.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  unused:
    exported-is-used: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
# Removed
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.usestdlibvars.os-dev-null`

This option has been deprecated since v1.51.0 and has been removed.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  usestdlibvars:
    os-dev-null: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
# Removed
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.usestdlibvars.syslog-priority`

This option has been deprecated since v1.51.0 and has been removed.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  usestdlibvars:
    syslog-priority: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
# Removed
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.wrapcheck.ignoreInterfaceRegexps`

> This option has been replaced with `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-interface-regexps`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option has been renamed to `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-interface-regexps`.
```

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  wrapcheck:
    ignoreInterfaceRegexps:
      - '^(?i)c(?-i)ach(ing|e)'
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    wrapcheck:
      ignore-interface-regexps:
        - '^(?i)c(?-i)ach(ing|e)'
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.wrapcheck.ignorePackageGlobs`

> This option has been replaced with `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-package-globs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option has been renamed to `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-package-globs`.
```

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  wrapcheck:
    ignorePackageGlobs:
      - 'encoding/*'
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    wrapcheck:
      ignore-package-globs:
        - 'encoding/*'
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.wrapcheck.ignoreSigRegexps`

> This option has been replaced with `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-sig-regexps`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option has been renamed to `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-sig-regexps`.
```

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
  linters-settings:
    wrapcheck:
      ignoreSigRegexps:
        - '\.New.*Error\('
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    wrapcheck:
      ignore-sig-regexps:
        - '\.New.*Error\('
```

</details>

#### `linters-settings.wrapcheck.ignoreSigs`

> This option has been replaced with `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-sigs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This option has been renamed to `linters.settings.wrapcheck.ignore-sigs`.
```

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters-settings:
  wrapcheck:
    ignoreSigs:
      - '.Errorf('
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  settings:
    wrapcheck:
      ignore-sigs:
        - '.Errorf('
```

</details>

### `output`

#### `output.format`

This property has been deprecated since v1.57.0 and has been replaced with `output.formats`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
output:
  format: 'checkstyle:report.xml,json:stdout,colored-line-number'
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml

> output:
>   formats:
>     text:
>       path: stdout
>       color: true
>     json:
>       path: stdout
>     checkstyle:
>       path: 'report.xml'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
output:
  formats:
    checkstyle:
      path: 'report.xml'
    json:
      path: stdout
    text:
      path: stdout
      color: true
```

```

</details>

> #### `output.formats[].format: name`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### `output.formats[].format: <name>`
```

> The property `output.formats[].format` has been replaced with `output.formats[].formatName`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The property `output.formats[].format` has been replaced with `output.formats[].<format_name>`.
```

> The formats `colored-line-number`, `colored-tab` has been removed. Use `output.formats[].text.colors: true` and `output.formats[].tab.colors: true` instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The formats `colored-line-number`, `colored-tab` have been replaced by an option `colors`:
- `output.formats[].text.colors: true`
- `output.formats[].tab.colors: true`.
```

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
output:
  formats:
    - format: json
      path: stderr
    - format: checkstyle
      path: 'report.xml'
    - format: colored-line-number
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
output:
  formats:
    json:
      path: stderr
    checkstyle:
      path: 'report.xml'
    text:
      path: stdout
      colors: true
```

</details>

#### `output.show-stats`

This property is `true` by default.

#### `output.sort-order`

> This property has new default: [`linter`, `file`] instead of [`file`].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This property has new default: `['linter', 'file']` instead of `['file']`.
```

#### `output.sort-results`

> The property has been removed. The output results are always sorted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The property has been removed.
The output results are always sorted.
```

  default-severity: error
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
severity:
  default: error
```

</details>

#### `severity.rules.case-sensitive`

`severity.rules.text` and `severity.rules.source` are case-sensitive by default.

To ignore case, use `(?i)` at the beginning of a regex syntax.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
severity:
  case-sensitive: true
  rules:
    - severity: info
      linters:
        - foo
      text: 'Example.*'
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
severity:
  rules:
    - severity: info
      linters:
        - foo
      text: '(?i)Example.*'
```

</details>

### `linters`

#### `linters.disable-all`

This property has been replaced with `linters.default: none`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  disable-all: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  default: none
```

</details>

#### `linters.enable-all`

This property has been replaced with `linters.default: all`.

<details>
<summary>v1</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  enable-all: true
```

</details>

<details>
<summary>v2</summary>

```yaml
linters:
  default: all
```

</details>

#### `linters.fast`

> This property has been replaced with `linters.default: fast`. It is not a strictly equivalent.
> 
> <details>
> <summary>v1</summary>
> 
> ```yaml
> linters:
>   fast: true
> ```
> 
> </details>
> 
> <details>
> <summary>v2</summary>
> 
> ```yaml
> linters:
>   default: fast
> ```
> 
> </details>
> 
> Also, the new flag option `--fast-only` filters enabled linters to keep only "fast" linters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This property has been removed.

There are 2 new options (they are not strictly equivalent to the previous option):
1. `linters.default: fast`: set all "fast" linters as the default set of linters.
    ```yaml
    linters:
      default: fast
    ```
2. `--fast-only`: filters all enabled linters to keep only "fast" linters.
```
